.TH ELKIRC 1 "8 December 2025" "elkirc 0.1" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
elkirc \- ultra\-lightweight ELKS\-first IRC client

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B elkirc
.RB [ -d | --debug ]
.RB [ -c | --color ]
.RB [ -s
.IR server ]
.RB [ -p
.IR port ]
.RB [ -n
.IR nick ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
elkirc is a minimal, portable IRC client intended to run on resource-constrained systems (ELKS) while remaining usable on modern platforms.
It uses a single TCP connection and `select()` to multiplex stdin and the network socket.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -d ", " --debug
Enable debug mode. When enabled, PING messages from the server are displayed. By default, PING messages are hidden to reduce clutter.

.TP
.BR -c ", " --color
Enable color output using ANSI escape codes. Colors enhance readability:

.TP
.BR -s ", " server
IRC server hostname. If not specified, elkirc starts without connecting. You can connect later using the \fB/connect\fR command.

.TP
.BR -p ", " port
IRC server port. Defaults to 6667 if a server is specified with \fB-s\fR. Ignored if no server is specified.

.TP
.BR -n ", " nick
Your IRC nickname. If not specified, elkirc uses your system username (from \fB$USER\fR environment variable or \fBgetpwuid()\fR).

.SH COMMANDS
The following commands are typed at the prompt (start with a `/`):

.TP
.BI /connect " server" " [port]"
.BI /c " server" " [port]"
Connect to an IRC server. If port is not specified, defaults to 6667. This command only works when not already connected.

.TP
.BI /nick " newnick"
.BI /n " newnick"
Change your nickname.

.TP
.BI /join " #channel|nick"
.BI /j " #channel|nick"
Join a channel or switch to a private target.

.TP
.BI /leave " [target]"
.BI /l " [target]"
.BI /part " [target]"
.BI /p " [target]"
Leave a channel or private conversation. If no target is specified, leaves the current target. For channels (starting with \fB#\fR), sends a PART command to the server. After leaving, the target automatically returns to your nick.

.TP
.BI /msg " nick message"
Send a private message to \fInick\fR.

.TP
.BI /raw " text"
Send raw IRC text to the server.

.TP
.B /quit
.B /q
Disconnect from the server (sends QUIT command) but does not exit elkirc. After disconnecting, the target automatically returns to your nick.

.TP
.B /exit
.B /e
Exit elkirc immediately. If connected, sends QUIT command before exiting.

.SH EXAMPLES
Connect to libera.chat with all options:
.RS
.PP
.B elkirc -d -c -s irc.libera.chat -p 6667 -n alice
.RE
.PP
Connect with minimal options (uses default port 6667 and system username):
.RS
.PP
.B elkirc -s irc.libera.chat
.RE
.PP
Start without connecting (connect later with /connect):
.RS
.PP
.B elkirc -n alice
.RE
.PP
Start with system username, no connection:
.RS
.PP
.B elkirc
.RE

.SH BUGS
Minimal feature set: no IPv6, no TLS, no message history.

.SH AUTHOR
Written and maintained by Jose Beneyto (sepen@crux-arm.nu).

